\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename cheerilee.info
@settitle Cheerilee
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for the Cheerilee toolkit library.

Copyright @copyright{} 2015-2106 Alessio Vanni

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Cheerilee: (cheerilee).       Graphical toolkit library
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Cheerilee
@subtitle An X Window System toolkit library for Emacs
@author Alessio Vanni (@email{vannilla@@firemail.cc})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Cheerilee
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::    A general introduction to the library.
* Installation::  Getting it to work.
* Connecting:: Starting and stopping the connection.
* Defining Elements::     Creating the elements to display.
* Starting Applications:: Running an application after defining it.
* Events:: Handling different kinds of events.
* GNU Free Documentation License::  Licensing this manual
* Index::         Complete Index.
* Functions::     A list of every function available.
* Variables::     A list of every variable available.
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@cindex Overview
Cheerilee is a graphical toolkit library written in Emacs Lisp.
It allows Emacs to create graphical application, using the X11 protocol.

Each application is defined by a tree of elements.
Every element has a set of attributes, to specify e.g. the location
of the element. @xref{Defining Elements}.

The library also offers facilities to handle events, like
keyboard inputs, or mouse clicks. @xref{Events}.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex Installing the library
Installing the library is as simple as adding the directory
to your @code{load-path}:

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/library")
@end lisp

After that, just @code{(require 'cheerilee)} to load all the symbols.

@node Connecting
@chapter Connecting
@cindex Connecting to the server
Before an application can run, Emacs needs to connect with the X server.

@defvar cheerilee-connection
This variable holds all the needed informations about the current connection.
@end defvar

The following functions control connections and disconnections with the server.

@defun cheerilee-connect
Start a connection between Emacs and the X server.
The connection is done through a socket, so the server must run
in the same machine as Emacs.

The function also initializes event handling.
@end defun

@defun cheerilee-close-absolutely-everything
Disconnects Emacs from the X server.

Since the connection is closed, any running application is automatically
closed, and any allocated resource is freed from memory.
@end defun

@defun cheerilee-process-alive-p
Returns @code{nil} if there is no connection with the X server, otherwise
it returns @code{t}.
@end defun

@node Defining Elements
@chapter Defining Elements
@cindex Define the application's elements
To have a working application, you first need to define its structure.
This is done by defining elements through specific macros.

The following sections describe these macros:

@menu
* Frame::       The root window
* Window::      A generic container
* Button::      An element with text inside
* Text::        Displaying a string
* Textbox::     Inserting and manipulating text
* Examples::    Complete examples of application trees.
@end menu

@node Frame
@section Frame
@cindex Define a frame
A frame is a simple X window. Any other element is displayed inside
this window, and, as such, it must be the root of the tree.
The name comes from Emacs's frames (@pxref{(emacs)Frames}).

@defmac cheerilee-defframe id &rest args-and-children
@code{cheerilee-defframe} defines a new frame, using @var{id} as its name.
@code{args-and-children} is a set of optional attribute definitions,
followed by a set of children.

The frame element's attributes are the following:

@table @code
@item :name
The application's name, as displayed by the window manager.
If not provided, it defaults to ``Application''.

@item :background
The frame's background color, as a string.
If not provided, it defaults to ``white''.

@item :size
The frame's dimensions. The passed value must be a cons, defined
either as

@lisp
'(@var{car} . @var{cdr})
@end lisp

or as

@lisp
(cons @var{car} @var{cdr})
@end lisp

@var{car} and @var{cdr} must be non-floating point numbers.
@end table
@end defmac

@node Window
@section Window
@cindex Define a window
A window is a generic rectangular area. It's purpose is to be a
container for other elements.  The name comes from Emacs's windows
(@pxref{(emacs)Windows}).

@defmac cheerilee-defwindow id &rest args-and-children
@code{cheerilee-defwindow} defines a new window, using @var{id} as its
name.  @code{args-and-children} is a set of optional attribute
definitions, followed by a set of children.

The window element's attributes are the following:

@table @code
@item :location
The location of the element inside its parent. The passed value must
be a cons, defined either as

@lisp
'(@var{car} . @var{cdr})
@end lisp

or as

@lisp
(cons @var{car} @var{cdr})
@end lisp

@var{car} and @var{cdr} must be non-floating point numbers.

The location is relative, so, for example, if the window is a
inside of a frame, the value passed to the attribute is relative to (0 . 0),
otherwise, if the window is inside another window located at (100 . 33),
the actual location of this window is

@lisp
(cons (+ 100 @var{car}) (+ 33 @var{cdr}))
@end lisp

@item :size
The window dimensions. The passed value must be a cons, defined either
as

@lisp
'(@var{car} . @var{cdr})
@end lisp

or as

@lisp
(cons @var{car} @var{cdr})
@end lisp

@var{car} and @var{cdr} must be non-floating point numbers.

@item :foreground
The color used to draw the window's borders, as a string.
If not provided, it defaults to ``black''.

@item :line-width
How much wide lines are drawn.
@end table
@end defmac

@node Button
@section Button
@cindex Define a button
The button element is a box with a string of text inside.
Its purpose is to add basic user interactions to the application.

@defmac cheerilee-defbutton id &rest args
@code{cheerilee-defbutton} defines a new button, using @var{id} as its
name. @code{args} is a set of optional attribute definitions.

The attributes are the same of windows (@pxref{Window}), with the
following attributes added:

@table @code
@item :background
The color used as the text background, as a string. It is a good idea
to keep it the same as the frame's background color, unless you want
to highlight it. If not provided it defaults to ``white''.

@item :font
The font used to display text. It must be a valid X font name, as a string.
If not provided, it defaults to ``7x14''.

@item :text
The actual text to be displayed inside the element. Needless to say,
it must be a string.
@end table
@end defmac

@node Text
@section Text
@cindex Define a simple text element
The text element has the only purpose of showing a string without
being bound by any relation (besides the parent-child given by the
tree structure) with other elements.

@defmac cheerilee-deftext id &rest args
@code{cheerilee-deftext} defines a new text element, using @var{id} as
its name. @code{args} is a set of optional attribute definitions.

The attributes are the same as the button (@pxref{Button}), with the
exception of the @code{:size} attribute, absent in the text element.
@end defmac

@node Textbox
@section Textbox
@cindex Define a textbox
The textbox elements allows the user to insert and delete text inside it.
Its main purpose is to get text inputs from the user.

@defmac cheerilee-deftextbox id &rest args
@code{cheerilee-deftextbox} defines a new textbox element, using @var{id} as
its name. @code{args} is a set of optional attribute definitions.

The attributes are the same as the button (@pxref{Button}).
In this case, the @code{:text} field is used as the initial content of the
textbox.
@end defmac

@node Examples
@section Examples
@cindex Some complete examples
This section shows some complete trees examples.

The following expression generates a frame with ID ``Frame''.
This frame has a window inside, with ID ``0''.
Finally, the window has the string ``This is an example'' inside, as
an element with ID ``0.5''.

@lisp
(cheerilee-defframe "Frame"
  :size (cons 640 480)
  :name "Example 1"
  (cheerilee-defwindow 0
    :location (cons 10 5)
    :size (cons 220 204)
    (cheerilee-deftext 0.5
      :text "This is an example"
      :location (cons 30 25))))
@end lisp

The following expression generates a tree similar to the previous one,
but now the frame has a second child, a button with ID ``?k''.

@lisp
(cheerilee-defframe "Frame"
  :size (cons 640 480)
  :name "Example 1"
  (cheerilee-defwindow 0
    :location (cons 10 5)
    :size (cons 220 204)
    (cheerilee-deftext 0.5
      :text "This is an example"
      :location (cons 30 25)))
  (cheerilee-defbutton ?k
    :location (cons 245 5)
    :size (cons 67 33)
    :text "Click Here!"))
@end lisp

@node Starting Applications
@chapter Starting Applications
@cindex Run an application after defining it
After defining a tree, you must use the following functions to
actually begin running the application.

@defun cheerilee-add-tree tree
Adds @var{tree} to the list of applications to display.  The system
will then periodically scan this list and update the display
accordingly.
@end defun

@defun cheerilee-initialize-events
Initialize event handling for every application.
It should be always called before running an application, so that
events are properly handled.
@end defun

@defun cheerilee-start-operations
This is the function that actually begin the execution.  It should be
always called when starting an application, after adding its tree.
@end defun

@node Events
@chapter Events
@cindex Handling Events
Event handlers are special functions, associated with an element of
the application, and called automatically when the X server sends
an event to the application.

You can define a handler using the following macro:

@defmac cheerilee-defevent name type class [docstring] body@enddots{}
This macro defines an event handler called @var{name}.

@var{type} is one of the following unquoted symbols:
@code{button}; @code{keyboard}; @code{motion}.
The following sections will explain their meaning.

@var{class} is the type of element this handler will be applied to.
It is used to associate different handlers for the same event to
different elements. For example, a button reacts differently than a
textbox to mouse clicks.
The class of an element can be derived by prefixing @code{cheerilee-}
to the element type, e.g. use @code{cheerilee-window} to associate the handler
to windows (@pxref{Window}).

The optional argument @var{docstring} is the same as in @code{defun}
or @code{defmacro}: a string used by Emacs's help functions.

The macro exposes some hidden variables, listed in the following sections,
so make sure not to call any variable you define in the body with the same name.
@end defmac

@menu
* Mouse Button Events:: Defining mouse button event handlers.
* Keyboard Events::     Defining keyboard events.
* Motion Events::       Defining motion events.
@end menu

@node Mouse Button Events
@section Mouse Button Events
@cindex How to add a function to handle the mouse buttons
Mouse event handlers are defined by giving @code{button} to
@code{cheerilee-defevent}.

In this case, the macro exposes the following variables:

@defvar this
The element that received the event.
@end defvar

@defvar x
Where the event is located horizontally, starting from the top-left
corner of the application frame and going right.
@end defvar

@defvar y
Where the event is located vertically, starting from the top-left
corner of the application frame and going down.
@end defvar

@defvar detail
The button pressed, as a number.
@end defvar

@defvar tree
The application that received the event.
@end defvar

After defining the handler, you can use it for two types of events:

@defun cheerilee-add-button-press-event tree id fun
This function associate @var{fun}, an event handler, with @emph{every} element
called @var{id} in @var{tree}.  This method will be called when any
mouse button is pressed.

For example, calling

@lisp
(cheerilee-add-button-press-event appl "ID" #'mouse-event-function)
@end lisp

will associate @code{mouse-event-function} with every element
called ``ID'' inside @code{appl}.
@end defun

@defun cheerilee-add-button-release-event tree id fun
This function works the same as
@code{cheerilee-add-button-press-event}, with the difference that
@var{fun} is called when any mouse button is released.
@end defun

@node Keyboard Events
@section Keyboard Events
@cindex How to add a function to handle the keyboard
Keyboard event handlers are defined by giving @code{keyboard} to
@code{cheerilee-defevent}.

In this case, the macro exposes the following variables:

@defvar this
The element that received the event.
@end defvar

@defvar detail
The button pressed, as a number.
@end defvar

@defvar modifier
Any special button pressed together with @code{detail}, like @key{CTRL} or
@key{META}.
@end defvar

@defvar tree
The application that received the event.
@end defvar

After defining the handler, you can use it for two types of events:

@defun cheerilee-add-key-press-event tree id fun
This function associate @var{fun}, an event handler, with @emph{every} element
called @var{id} in @var{tree}.  This method will be called when any
keyboard button is pressed.

For example, calling

@lisp
(cheerilee-add-key-press-event appl "ID" #'keyboard-event-function)
@end lisp

will associate @code{keyboard-event-function} with every element called
``ID'' inside @code{appl}.
@end defun

@defun cheerilee-add-key-release-event tree id fun
This function works the same as @code{cheerilee-add-key-press-event},
with the difference that @var{fun} is called when any keyboard button
is released.
@end defun

@node Motion Events
@section Motion Events
@cindex How to add a function to handle mouse motion events
Motion event handlers are defined by giving @code{motion} to
@code{cheerilee-defevent}.

In this case, the macro exposes the following variables:

@defvar this
The element that received the event.
@end defvar

@defvar x
Where the event is located horizontally, starting from the top-left
corner of the application frame and going right.
@end defvar

@defvar y
Where the event is located vertically, starting from the top-left
corner of the application frame and going down.
@end defvar

@defvar tree
The application that received the event.
@end defvar

After defining the handler, you can use it with

@defun cheerilee-add-motion-event tree id fun
This function associate @var{fun}, an event handler, with @emph{every} element
called @var{id} in @var{tree}.  This method will be called when the mouse moves.

For example, calling

@lisp
(cheerilee-add-motionevent appl "ID" #'motion-event-function)
@end lisp

will associate @code{motion-event-function} with every element called
``ID'' inside @code{appl}.
@end defun

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Concepts Index
@printindex cp

@node Functions
@unnumbered Functions Index
@printindex fn

@node Variables
@unnumbered Variables Index
@printindex vr

@bye
